technology can change our understanding
of nature take for example the case of
lions for centuries it's been said that
female lions do all of the hunting out
in the open savanna and male lions do
nothing until it's time for dinner
you've heard this - I can tell well
recently I led an airborne mapping
campaign in the Kruger National Park in
South Africa
our colleagues put GPS tracking collars
on male and female lions and we mapped
their hunting behavior from the air the
lower left shows a lion sizing up a herd
of Impala for a kill and the right shows
what I call the lion view shed that's
how far the lion can see in all
directions until his or her view is
obstructed by vegetation and what we
found is that male lions are not the
lazy hunters we thought them to be they
just use a different strategy whereas
the female lions hunt out in the open
savanna over long distances usually
during the day male lions to use an
ambush strategy in dense vegetation and
often at night this video shows the
actual hunting viewsheds of male lions
on the left and females on the right red
and darker colors show more dense
vegetation and the white or wide-open
spaces and this is the view shed right
literally at the eye level of hunting
male and female lions all of a sudden
you get a very clear understanding of
the very spooky conditions under which
male lions do their hunting I bring up
this example to begin because it
emphasizes how little we know about
nature there's been a huge amount of
work done so far to try to slow down our
losses of tropical forests and we are
losing our forests at a rapid rate as
shown in red on the slide I find it
ironic that we're doing so much yet
these areas are fairly unknown to
science so how can we save what we don't
understand I'm a global ecologist and an
earth Explorer with a background in
physics and chemistry and biology and
a lot of other boring subjects but above
all I'm obsessed with what we don't know
about our planet so I created this the
Carnegie airborne observatory or CA oh
it may look like a plane with a fancy
paint job but I packed it with over a
thousand kilos of high-tech sensors
computers and a very motivated staff of
earth scientists and pilots two of our
instruments are very unique one is
called an imaging spectrometer that can
actually measure the chemical
composition of plants as we fly over
them another one is a set of lasers very
high-powered lasers that fire out of the
bottom of the plane sweeping across the
ecosystem and measuring it at nearly
500,000 times per second in
high-resolution 3d here's an image of
the Golden Gate Bridge in San Francisco
not far from where I live although we
flew straight over this bridge we imaged
it in 3d captured its color in just a
few seconds but the real power of the
sea AO is its ability to capture the
actual building blocks of ecosystems
this is a small town in the Amazon image
with the CA o we can slice through our
data and see for example the 3d
structure of the vegetation in the
buildings or we can use the chemical
information to actually figure out how
fast the plants are growing as we fly
over them the hottest Pink's are the
fastest growing plants and we can see
biodiversity in ways that you never
could have imagined this is what a
rainforest might look like as you fly
over in a hot-air balloon this is how we
see a rain forest in kaleidoscopic color
that tells us that there are many
species living with one another but you
have to remember that these trees are
literally bigger than whales and what
that means is that they're impossible to
understand just by walking on the ground
below them so our imagery is 3d its
chemical its biological and this tells
us not only the species that are living
in the canopy but it tells us a lot of
information about the rest of the
species that occupy the rainforest now I
created the CA o in order to answer
questions that have proven extremely
challenging to answer from any other
vantage point such as from the ground or
from satellite sensors I want to share
three of those questions with you today
the first question is how do we manage
our carbon reserves in tropical forests
tropical forests contain a huge amount
of carbon in the trees and we need to
keep that carbon in those forests if
we're going to avoid any further global
warming
unfortunately global carbon emissions
from deforestation now equals the global
transportation sector that's all ships
airplanes trains and automobiles
combined so it's understandable that
policy negotiators have been working
hard to reduce deforestation but they're
doing it on landscapes that are hardly
known to science if you don't know where
the carbon is exactly in detail how can
you know what you're losing basically we
need a high-tech accounting system with
our system we're able to see the carbon
stocks of tropical forests in utter
detail the red shows obviously
closed-canopy tropical forests and then
you see the cookie cutting or the
cutting of the forest in yellows and
greens it's like cutting a cake except
this cake is about whale deep and yet we
can zoom in and see the forest and the
trees at the same time and what's
amazing is even though we flew very high
above this forest later on in analysis
we can go in and actually experience the
treetops leaf by leaf branch by branch
just as the other species that live in
this forest experience it along with the
trees themselves we've been using the
technology to explore and to actually
put out the first carbon geographies in
high resolution in faraway places like
the Amazon basin and not so far away
places like the United States and
Central America what I'm going to do is
I'm going to take you on a
high-resolution first time tour of the
carbon landscapes of Peru and then
Panama the colors are gonna be going
from red to blue red is extremely high
carbon stocks your largest cathedral
forests you can imagine and blue are
very low carbon stocks and let me tell
you Peru alone is an amazing place
totally unknown in terms of its carbon
geography until today we can fly to this
area in northern Peru and see super high
carbon stocks in red and the Amazon
River and floodplain cutting right
through it
we can go to an area of utter
devastation caused by deforestation in
blue
and the virus of deforestation spreading
out in orange we can also fly to the
southern Andes to see treeline and see
exactly how the carbon geography ends as
we go up into the mountain system and we
can go to the biggest swamp in the
Western Amazon it's a watery dreamworld
akin to Jim Cameron's Avatar we can go
to one of the smallest tropical
countries Panama and see also a huge
range of carbon variation from high in
red to low in blue
unfortunately most of the carbon is lost
in the lowlands but what you see that's
left in terms of high carbon stocks and
greens and reds is the stuff that's up
in the mountains one interesting
exception of this is right in the middle
of your screen you're seeing the buffer
zone around the Panama Canal that's in
the reds and yellows the Canal
authorities are using for us to protect
their watershed in global commerce this
kind of carbon mapping has transformed
conservation and resource policy
development it's really advancing our
ability to save forests and to curb
climate change my second question how do
we prepare for climate change in a place
in the Amazon rainforest let me tell you
I spend a lot of time in these places
and we're seeing the climate changing
already temperatures are increasing and
what's really happening is we're getting
a lot of droughts recurring droughts the
2010 mega drought is shown here with red
showing an area about the size of
Western Europe the Amazon was so dry in
2010 that even the main stem of the
Amazon River itself dried up partially
as you see in the photo in the lower
portion of the slide what we found is
that in very remote areas these droughts
are having a big negative impact on
tropical forests for example these are
all the dead trees in red that suffered
mortality following the 2010 drought
this area happens to be in on the border
of Peru and Brazil totally unexplored
almost totally unknown scientifically so
what we think as earth scientists is
species are going to have to migrate
with climate change from the east in
Brazil all the way west into the Andes
and up into the mountains in order to
minimize their exposure to climate
change one of the problems with this is
that humans are taking apart the Western
Amazon as we speak look
this hundred square kilometer gash in
the forest created by gold miners you
see the forest in green and 3d and you
see the effects of gold mining down
below the soil surface species have
nowhere to migrate in a system like this
obviously if you haven't been to the
Amazon you should go it's an amazing
experience every time no matter where
you go you're gonna probably see it this
way on a river but what happens is a lot
of times the rivers hide what's really
going on back in the forest itself we
flew over the same River image the
system in 3d the forest is on the left
and then we can digitally remove the
forest and see what's going on below the
canopy and in this case we found gold
mining activity all of it illegal set
back away from the river's edge as you
see in those strange pock marks coming
up on your screen on the right don't
worry we're working with the authorities
to deal with this and many many other
problems in the region so in order to
put together a conservation plan for
these unique important quarters like the
Western Amazon in the Andes Amazon
corridor we have to start making
geographically explicit plans now how do
we do that if we don't know the
geography of biodiversity in the region
if it's so unknown to science so what
we've been doing is using the laser
guided spectroscopy from the cao2 map
for the first time the biodiversity of
the Amazon rainforest here you see
actual data showing different species in
different colors reds are one type of
species blues are another and greens are
yet another and when we take this
together and scale up to the regional
level we get a completely new geography
of biodiversity unknown prior to this
work this tells us where the big
biodiversity changes occur from habitat
to habitat and that's really important
because it tells us a lot about where
species may migrate to and migrate from
as the climate shifts and this is the
pivotal information that's needed by
decision-makers to develop protected
areas in the context of their regional
development plans and third and final
question is how do we manage
biodiversity on a planet of protected
ecosystems the example I started
with about Lions hunting that was a
study we did behind the fence line of a
protected area in South Africa and the
truth is much of Africa's nature is
going to persist into the future in
protected areas like I show in blue on
the screen
this puts incredible pressure and
responsibility on park management they
need to do and make decisions that will
benefit all the species that they're
protecting some of their decisions have
really big impacts for example how much
and where to use fire as a management
tool or how to deal with a large species
like elephants which may if their
populations get too large have a
negative impact on the ecosystem and on
other species and let me tell you these
types of dynamics really play out on the
landscape in the foreground is an area
with lots of fire and lots of elephants
wide-open savanna and blue and just a
few trees as we cross this fence line
now we're getting into an area that has
had protection from fire and zero
elephants dense vegetation a radically
different ecosystem and in a place like
Kruger the soaring elephant densities
are a real problem I know it's a
sensitive issue for many of you and
there are no easy answers with this but
what's good is that the technology we've
developed and we're working with South
Africa for example is allowing us to map
every single tree in the savanna and
then through repeat flights were able to
see which trees are being pushed over by
elephants in the red as you see on the
screen and how much that's happening in
different types of landscapes in the
savanna that's giving park managers a
very first opportunity to use tactical
management strategies that are more
nuanced and don't lead to those extremes
that I just showed you so really the way
we're looking at protected areas
nowadays is to think of it as tending to
a circle of life where we have fire
management elephant management those
impacts on the structure of the
ecosystem and then those impacts
affecting everything from insects up to
apex predators like lions going forward
I plan to greatly expand the airborne
observatory I'm hoping to actually put
the technology into orbit so we can
manage the
entire planet with technologies like
this until then you're gonna find me
flying in some remote place that you've
never heard of I just want to end by
saying that technology is absolutely
critical to managing our planet but even
more important is the understanding and
wisdom to apply it thank you
[Applause]
[Music]